w-12273311-Reuse types first draft (#235)
mulesoft/docs-dataweave: modules/ROOT/pages/dataweave-type-reuse-module-loader.adoc

> = Reusing XML Schema Module Loader

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Reusing XML Schema Module Loader
```

Are we reusing the loader or the schema?

ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]

> 

Reviewer: Regarding the file name `dataweave-type-reuse-module-loader.adoc`, since this page is about loading an XML schema, should it follow the naming pattern for the JSON schema loader (`dataweave-type-reuse-json-schema.adoc`) to become  `dataweave-type-reuse-xml-schema.adoc`?

> You can import XML schema files (`.xsd`) inside your DataWeave script as modules using the `xmlschema!` module loader. This loader allows you to use types declared on your schema inside DataWeave directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can import XML schema files (`.xsd`) inside your DataWeave script as modules by using the `xmlschema!` module loader. This loader enables you to use types that are declared on your schema inside DataWeave directly.
```

DataWeave loads your XSD file and translates declarations inside your file into DataWeave type directives that can be accessed in the same way as types from any other DataWeave module. Use them to build new types, type check your variables, do pattern matching, or declare new functions that use types. There are no restrictions on how to use these types.

> The following example shows how to look for an XSD file in the path “org/weave/myfolder/User.xsd” being the first path the root of the classpath of your application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to look for an XSD file in the path `org/weave/myfolder/User.xsd` being the first path the root of the classpath of your application:
```

Reviewer: What do we mean by "being the _first path_ the root of..."? 

Looking at `xmlschema!org::weave::myfolder::User`, looks like the path to the schema file matches the classpath. just not clear what "first path" means here.

----
import * from xmlschema!org::weave::myfolder::User
----

== Import Syntax

> In order to import the JSON schema types, as shown above, use the following directive:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To import the JSON schema types, as shown above, use the following directive:
```

----

> import _typesToImport_ from jsonschema!_pathToXsdSchemaFile_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import _typesToImport_ from xmlschema!_pathToXsdSchemaFile_
```

----

The following example shows how to import a type:

----

> import * from jsonschema!example::schema::Person

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import * from xmlschema!example::schema::Person
```

----

> Where:

Reviewer: Maybe put the example above the syntax so that the "Where" follows the syntax bc `typeToImport` and `pathToXsdSchemaFile` are mentioned there.

> * `typeToImport`: You can replace it by `\*` to import all types defined in the schema or to export a single type from the schema, for example, *Root*. You can also import JSON schema types with a different name, for example, *Root as Person*. This way you can reference the type with that name in the script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `typeToImport`: You can use `\*` to import all types defined in the schema or to export a single type from the schema, for example, *Root*. You can also import JSON schema types with a different name, for example, *Root as Person*. This way you can reference the type with that name in the script.
```

Reviewer: Do you "export" a single type or import it?

Reviewer: Same questions as before. regarding `*Root*`

> * `pathToXsdSchemaFile`: This represents the path to the schema file, modifying the file separators for `::` and removing the `.xsd` extension from the file name. For example, if the path to the schema is “example/schema/Person.xsd”, “example::schema::Person” must be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `pathToXsdSchemaFile`: To specify the path to the schema file, replace the file separators with `::` and remove the `.xsd` extension from the file name. For example, if the path to the schema is `example/schema/Person.xsd`, use `example::schema::Person`.
```

== Use Your Types in a DataWeave Script

> This is how you can use types to import XML schema files inside your DataWeave script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows how to use types to import XML schema files into your DataWeave script.
```

.XSD Script
[source,XML]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<xs:schema attributeFormDefault="unqualified" elementFormDefault="qualified"
           xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema">
    <xs:element name="Root">
        <xs:complexType>
            <xs:choice>
                <xs:element name="employee" type="employee"/>
                <xs:element name="member" type="member"/>
            </xs:choice>
            <xs:attribute name="id" use="required"/>
        </xs:complexType>
    </xs:element>
    <xs:complexType name="employee">
        <xs:sequence>
            <xs:element name="name" type="xs:string"/>
        </xs:sequence>
    </xs:complexType>

    <xs:complexType name="member">
        <xs:sequence>
            <xs:element name="id" type="xs:string"/>
        </xs:sequence>
    </xs:complexType>
</xs:schema>
----

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The following script returns `true` because it complies with the XML schema:
```

.DataWeave Script
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0

> import * from xmlschema!org::mule::weave::v2::module::xmlschema::engine::pattern_matching::User

Reviewer: Where does `User` come from in this? `xmlschema!org::mule::weave::v2::module::xmlschema::engine::pattern_matching::User`

Reviewer: This example points to a path in our source code? Should we use that path?

{

>      //This would return true as it complies with the xml schema above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

      Root @(id:"test") :{
        employee: {
            "name": "Mariano"
        }
      } match {
             case is Root -> true
             else -> false
        }
}
----

> == From the XML Model to DataWeave

Reviewer: Can this title be made more clear?

Reviewer: I'm not sure we need it since there's only one subsection for it. Could we replace it with `== Built-in XML Schema Types`?

> As previously mentioned, the XML schema type system translates to DataWeave type directives. Therefore, as the two type models are considered different, some general rules and limitations apply.

Reviewer: what rules and limitations are we talking about?

> The translations between the XML schema model to DataWeave are described below using different XSD files showing how they translate to DataWeave code. Notice that these files are generated dynamically and are not visible, though they are useful to learn how to consume types from generated XSD files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The following sections illustrate how XSD files translate to DataWeave code.  These files are generated dynamically and are not visible, though they are useful for learning how to consume types from generated XSD files.
```

Reviewer: I'm not clear about the organization.
Where are the files? 
Are they the examples shown below built-in schema types? Should those be here under this paragraph?

=== Built-in XML Schema Types

DataWeave supports the following XSD types where `xs` is the XMLSchema default namespace:

[cols="2,2",options="header"]
|===
| XSD Type | Dataweave Type
| `xs:number`| `Number`
| `xs:int`| `Number`
| `xs:integer`| `Number`
| `xs:long`| `Number`
| `xs:short`| `Number`
| `xs:byte`| `Number`
| `xs:double`| `Number`
| `xs:decimal`| `Number`
| `xs:unsignedLong`| `Number`
| `xs:unsignedInt`| `Number`
| `xs:unsignedShort`| `Number`
| `xs:unsignedByte`| `Number`
| `xs:positiveInteger`| `Number`
| `xs:negativeInteger`| `Number`
| `xs:nonNegativeInteger`| `Number`
| `xs:nonPositiveInteger`| `Number`
| `xs:hexBinary`| `Binary`
| `xs:base64Binary`| `Binary`
| `xs:boolean`| `Boolean`
| `xs:any`| `String`
| `xs:string`| `String`
| `xs:normalizedString`| `String`
| `xs:datetime`| `DateTime`
| `xs:time`| `Time`
| `xs:date`| `LocalDateTime`
|===

> .XSD Script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.XSD Schema
```

                <xs:element name="normalizedString" type="xs:normalizedString"/>

                <xs:element name="integer" type="xs:integer"/>
                <xs:element name="negativeInteger" type="xs:negativeInteger"/>
                <xs:element name="int" type="xs:int"/>
                <xs:element name="unsignedInt" type="xs:unsignedInt"/>
                <xs:element name="unsignedLong" type="xs:unsignedLong"/>
                <xs:element name="unsignedShort" type="xs:unsignedShort"/>
                <xs:element name="float" type="xs:float"/>
                <xs:element name="double" type="xs:double"/>

                <xs:element name="date" type="xs:date"/>
                <xs:element name="dateTime" type="xs:dateTime"/>
                <xs:element name="time" type="xs:time"/>

                <xs:element name="boolean" type="xs:boolean"/>

                <xs:element name="hexBinary" type="xs:hexBinary"/>
                <xs:element name="base64Binary" type="xs:base64Binary"/>
                <xs:element name="decimal" type="xs:decimal"/>

            </xs:all>
        </xs:complexType>
    </xs:element>
</xs:schema>
----

> .Generated DataWeave Module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Generated DataWeave Module:
```

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0

type RootElementDefinition = {| Root: { string: String, normalizedString: String, integer: Number, negativeInteger: Number, int: Number, unsignedInt: Number, unsignedLong: Number, unsignedShort: Number, float: Number, double: Number, date: LocalDateTime, dateTime: DateTime, time: Time, boolean: Boolean, hexBinary: Binary, base64Binary: Binary, decimal: Number } |}

type Root = RootElementDefinition
----

> == XSD Structure Mapping

Reviewer: Recommend short into to this section.

=== Root Elements Declaration

> Each root element declared inside your XSD file generates a type directive with the element name followed by the `ElementDeclaration` extension and a type directive named *Root*, considered a Union type, consisting of all your root elements.

Reviewer: same question regarding `*Root*`

> Each root element declared inside your XSD file generates a type directive with the element name followed by the `ElementDeclaration` extension and a type directive named *Root*, considered a Union type, consisting of all your root elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each root element declared inside your XSD file generates a DataWeave type directive with the element name followed by the `ElementDeclaration` extension and a type directive named *Root*, considered a Union type, consisting of all your root elements.
```

The following example shows how to declare root elements:

> .XSD Script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.XSD:
```

<xs:schema attributeFormDefault="unqualified" elementFormDefault="qualified"
           xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema">
    <xs:element name="Root">
        <xs:complexType>
            <xs:choice>
                <xs:element name="employee" type="employee"/>
                <xs:element name="member" type="member"/>
            </xs:choice>
            <xs:attribute name="id" default="foo"/>
        </xs:complexType>
    </xs:element>
    <xs:complexType name="employee">
        <xs:sequence>
            <xs:element name="name" type="xs:string"/>
        </xs:sequence>
    </xs:complexType>

    <xs:complexType name="member">
        <xs:sequence>
            <xs:element name="id" type="xs:string"/>
        </xs:sequence>
    </xs:complexType>
</xs:schema>
----

.Generated DataWeave Module
[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0

type EmployeeDefinition = { employee: {- name: String -} }

type MemberDefinition = { member: {- id: String -} }

type RootElementDefinition = {| Root @(id?: String): {| employee: EmployeeDefinition.employee |} | {| member: MemberDefinition.member |} |}

type Root = RootElementDefinition
----

=== Imports/Includes

> The use of imports or includes inside an XSD schema file results in a DataWeave module import using the XML schema module loader pointing to the corresponding file. The file should have a `schemaLocation` declared relative to the main schema. Notice how the following examples use xref:dataweave-type-selector.adoc[]:

Reviewer: The first sentence is long and hard to follow. Is there a way to clarify it?

> .XSD Script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.XSD:
```

[source,XML]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<xsd:schema xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
						xmlns:common="http://common.com/COMMON">

	<xsd:import schemaLocation="common.xsd" namespace="http://common.com/COMMON" />

	<xsd:element name="Root" type="common:RequestHeader"/>

</xsd:schema>
----

> .Generated DataWeave Module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Generated DataWeave Module:
```

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0

ns ns0 http://common.com/COMMON

> Import xmlschema!org::mule::weave::v2::module::xmlschema::moduleloader::imports::common

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import xmlschema!org::mule::weave::v2::module::xmlschema::moduleloader::imports::common
```

Reviewer: I suspect that all these directives should be lower case: `import`

type RootElementDefinition = {| Root: common::RequestHeaderDefinition.ns0#RequestHeader |}

type Root = RootElementDefinition
----

=== Choice

You can map this XML schema structure to a `UnionType` in DataWeave:

> .XSD Script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.XSD:
```

[source,XML]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<xs:schema attributeFormDefault="unqualified" elementFormDefault="qualified"
           xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema">
    <xs:element name="Root">
        <xs:complexType>
            <xs:choice>
                <xs:element name="employee" type="employee"/>
                <xs:element name="member" type="member"/>
            </xs:choice>
        </xs:complexType>
    </xs:element>
    <xs:complexType name="employee">
        <xs:sequence>
            <xs:element name="name" type="xs:string"/>
        </xs:sequence>
    </xs:complexType>

    <xs:complexType name="member">
        <xs:sequence>
            <xs:element name="id" type="xs:string"/>
        </xs:sequence>
    </xs:complexType>
</xs:schema>
----

> .Generated DataWeave Module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Generated DataWeave Module:
```

[source,dataweave,linenums]
----
%dw 2.0

type EmployeeDefinition = { employee: {- name: String -} }

type MemberDefinition = { member: {- id: String -} }

type RootElementDefinition = {| Root: {| employee: EmployeeDefinition.employee |} | {| member: MemberDefinition.member |} |}

type Root = RootElementDefinition
----

=== Namespaces

> Namespaces on your XML schema file translate directly to DataWeave type directives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Namespaces in your XML schema file translate directly to DataWeave type directives.
```

> The following example shows how to set a specific `targetNamespace` where your elements exist. This namespace, which translates to DataWeave, is required if you want to select and navigate said types. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to set the specific `targetNamespace` where your elements exist. This namespace, which translates to DataWeave, is required if you want to select and navigate said types. 
```

> .XSD Script

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.XSD:
```

                <xs:element name="normalizedString" type="xs:normalizedString"/>
                <xs:element name="integer" type="xs:integer"/>
                <xs:element name="negativeInteger" type="xs:negativeInteger"/>
                <xs:element name="int" type="xs:int"/>
                <xs:element name="unsignedInt" type="xs:unsignedInt"/>
                <xs:element name="unsignedLong" type="xs:unsignedLong"/>
                <xs:element name="unsignedShort" type="xs:unsignedShort"/>
                <xs:element name="float" type="xs:float"/>
                <xs:element name="double" type="xs:double"/>
                <xs:element name="date" type="xs:date"/>
                <xs:element name="dateTime" type="xs:dateTime"/>
                <xs:element name="time" type="xs:time"/>
                <xs:element name="boolean" type="xs:boolean"/>
                <xs:element name="hexBinary" type="xs:hexBinary"/>
                <xs:element name="base64Binary" type="xs:base64Binary"/>
                <xs:element name="decimal" type="xs:decimal"/>
            </xs:all>
        </xs:complexType>
    </xs:element>
</xs:schema>
----

> .Generated DataWeave Module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Generated DataWeave Module:
```
